Having a big bang is one of the most common causes of data science project failures. This episode explains why it's better to aim for suboptimal solutions at the start of a project and how you can avoid the big bang problem by following an ancient Japanese philosophy.. This week we are going to talk about another mental model that we found very useful in our experience leading data science projects and teams. It's common to see in business when you start approaching a data intensive problem data initial planning, and then you have some initial directions to go with the root cause. Could be that when you ask a good problem solver or people who are interested in problem solving to find a solution for something, we often want to go for the best solution that there is.. Wabisabi is a concept that comes from the Japanese aesthetics and Japanese philosophy. It is used as a mental model to address the two problems we just saw. It allows you to get to a solution relatively quick and then use that to get feedback and improve on it. In a lot of cases, the data that you are working with has noise and it might be better to ignore it and focus on extracting the main message from the data. In data science and machine learning, one of the key principles is to be aware of the importance of imperfection. It's also important to be conscious of shortcuts and be disciplined about taking shortcuts. In the end, it's important to focus on the most sensitive and sensitive parts of applying the principles. It's important to have a conversation with the teams that will use your data driven solution to openly discuss the imperfections. It's also important to keep a record of the decision so that some point in the future, if this issue comes out, you still know why it's there and have an idea on how to fix it.. Tomorrow's episode of the show will focus on applying web services. The takeaway from the show is to take a look at some of the most important projects that you've done and see if you've carried some of them to a stage where they shouldn't have been carried or if you have the discipline to polish them.. This time, the mental model is a little bit more advanced. Wabisabi is an important tool that can make a huge difference for high uncertainty big scope projects, especially for advanced data science projects. See you next time for another episode of Naked Data Science.. If you want to become a data scientist, you should attend the NDS webinar. NDS will demystify the transition into data science and advise you on the four possible options you can take to go from where you are to landing a data science job in as little as nine months.
